adding the initial draft of a guidance doc for policy resoures (#370)
googleapis/aip: aip/cloud/new.md

---
aip:
  id: 2511
  scope: cloud
  state: draft
  created: 2019-11-22
permlink: /cloud/2511
redirect_from:
  - /2511
---

<!--
TODO: discuss policy lifecycle? binding lifecycle?
TODO: discuss policy conditions.
-->

# Policy API Guidance

> A policy is a document-based resource that, when set on a resource, controls

Reviewer: When you use the term "resource" here (the first time), are you using it consistent with the [AIP-121](http://aip.dev/121) definition of the word? (I _think_ the answer is no, but I am uncertain.)

(I am fairly confident that the remaining uses of the term are all the AIP-121 definition.)

Author: I've updated the phrasing. Please let me know what you think

some behavior for that resource and its descendants. Some examples of
controllable behaviors are:  who can access a resource, what configurations are
allowed for a resource and what billing account to charge for a resource’s
usage.

> There are 2 types of policies, _dedicated_ and _shared_.

Reviewer: I recommend a level-two header here. Perhaps "Definitions" or "Vocabulary"?

```suggestion
## Definitions

There are 2 types of policies, _dedicated_ and _shared_.
```

A _dedicated_ policy shares an identifier with the resource it is bound to. IAM
policies in GCP are an example of dedicated polices. Users "set" the policy on
directly on the resource they intend it to apply to, and all children of the
resource inherit the policy.

A _shared_ policy is a first-class resource (with its own identifier) and can
even have policies applied to it (like an authorization policy). Unlike other
resources, a shared policy can be _bound_ to one or more resources, and applies
to those resources and any descendents. An example of a shared policy is

> billing accounts which are associated with resouces that bill to them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
billing accounts, which are associated with resources that bill to them.
```

> ## Standard Methods

Reviewer: At this point we are starting to tell folks "what to do", so we need a level 2 `Guidance` header, and all remaining headers under guidance should be level 3.

> For most policy types, it makes sense to incorporate the policy name in to the

Reviewer: Reword this sentence to use the word **should**. (e.g. "APIs **should** incorporate the policy name into the method name for most policy types.")

> method name, for example `GetBillingPolicy` for a Billing policy. The

Reviewer: Nit: Make the example be a separate sentence.

> descriptions below omit the specific policy type for brevity.

Reviewer: Use IAM.

Author: IAM is a dedicated policy, so it would only work as an example in the dedicated policy section.

Furthermore, they are an established API which does not actually implement the guidance (they use an older notion of meta-api where their method appeared in the API of other resources [this ended poorly with regards to versioning]).

As such, I'm hesitant to use it as the example.

Reviewer: This is compelling. Thank you.
Can we link to a case where the guidance this AIP proposes is used? (Blatant hypocrisy alert: We often do not do this. That said, in this case I can not point to a single example, which worries me.)

Author: Maybe. There is an API release scheduled to occur later this week (but more likely January due to production release issues) which implements this guidance for shared policies.

I don't have a great public example for a dedicated policy.

Our team sees a lot of policies in the pipeline, and the lack of a guidance document makes it difficult to nudge those API's towards a standard. There are several failed attempts which make picking your favorite existing API a bad way to go.

Reviewer 2: @sir-buckyball Following up here, has there been any public API releases that can provide concrete examples for this AIP?

Author: At present I still don't have a public API to provide concrete examples of the concepts described here. There have been delays for an expected release.

Reviewer 2: Got it! :pray:

Reviewer 3: @sir-buckyball maybe it would make sense to release this in combination with a newsletter, announcing the AIP and a concrete example for its application rather than trying to fit an example here?

### Dedicated Policies

> Dedicated polices are the simpler of the two to implement, with a smaller API

Reviewer: Reword this to describe "what I should do".

Reviewer: As a naive reader, I am still unsure what to do here. (Sorry!)

scope. A common issue is that since they are bound to a single resource, the
permissions to modify the policy get conflated with permissions to modify the
resource.

- **SetPolicy** - Sets a dedicated policy for a resource
- **GetPolicy** - Retrieves the dedicated policy for a resource
- **DeletePolicy** - Deletes the dedicated policy for a resource
- **LookupEffectivePolicy** - Retrieves the effective policy for a resource,
  which is the combination of policies on the resource and any ancestors

### Shared Policies

> Shared policies have a more complex API scope, but are also substantially more

Reviewer: Reword this to describe "what I should do".

policy roles. They also allow a common policy definition (which might be quite
complex) to be bound to numerous resoures.

- **CreatePolicy** - Creates a shared policy resource
- **GetPolicy** - Retrieves a shared policy resource
- **UpdatePolicy** - Updates a shared policy resource
- **DeletePolicy** - Deletes a shared policy resource
- **ListPolicies** - Lists shared policy resources (typically for a given
  `parent`)
- **LookupEffectivePolicy** - Retrieves the effective policy for a given
  `resource`, which is the combination of the polices bound to the resource and
  any ancestors
- **CreateBinding** - Creates a binding between a shared policy resource and a
  specified resource
- **GetBinding** - Retrieves a binding between a shared policy resource and a
  resource
- **DeleteBinding** - Deletes a binding between a shared policy resource and a
  resource
- **ListBindings** - Lists bindings between shared policy resources and other
  resources. This method **must** accept either a reference to the shared
  policy resource or the target resource (typically via the `filter` field),
  and list all appropriate bindings.

### Permissions

> There **should** be a separate permission for each policy method, per standard

Reviewer: Each policy method **should** have a separate permission.

practice.

> Bindings are a bit special in that they connect two resources. Conceptually,

Reviewer: Throughout this section, the AIP starts treating "binding" and "resource" as proper nouns, but they are not. They should not get special capitalization.

it's easiest to think of a binding as two half-bindings, one connected to the

> Policy and one connected to the Resource. Each half-binding has it's own

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Policy and one connected to the Resource. Each half-binding has its own
```

> permission to create/delete. So to create a binding between a Policy and a

Reviewer: Therefore, creating a binding between a policy and  a resource requires two permissions; however, breaking a binding...

Resource requires 2 permissions, but to break a binding only requires
permission on either the Policy or the Resource.

> NOTE: At this point in time, no guidance is given for recreating a binding. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** No guidance is currently given for re-creating a binding. In
```

> theory only half of a binding could be deleted, thus allowing only a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
theory, only half of a binding could be deleted, thus requiring only a
```

> single-permission to re-establish the missing half of the binding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
single permission to re-establish the missing half of the binding.
```

## Effictive Policies

An effective policy is the combination of policies applied to the ancestry of a

> resource. For example, to determine the effective policy for a VM would require

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resource. For example, determining the effective policy for a VM would require
```

loading the policies attacted to the VM, Project, Folder, and Organization.

There are multiple combination stragies, and which one chosen depends on the
Policy system. Generally speaking, policies **should** be combined in an
additive fashion where leaf nodes take precedence for ALLOW semantics, and the
root nodes taking precendence for DENY semantics. This strategy works well for
large organizations where administrators need to delegate their responsibility
and/or want to set reasonable defaults at the top with overrides being set
where needed.

> In some use cases, a policy lower in the hierarchy taking precedency may be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some use cases, a policy lower in the hierarchy taking precedence is
```

unacceptable. We strongly encourage such cases to permit configuration of

> override policies instead of forcing the choice.

Reviewer: As a naive reader, I do not really understand what it is you are telling me to do here.

Author: I've rephrased this section. Please let me know if what I'm trying to communicate is clearer now.

> If no policies are bound the ancsestry of a resource, the effective resource is

Reviewer: Reword this to use must or should.

---
aip:
  id: 2511
  scope: cloud
  state: draft
  created: 2019-11-22
permlink: /cloud/2511
redirect_from:
  - /2511
---

<!--
TODO: discuss policy lifecycle? binding lifecycle?
TODO: discuss policy conditions.
TODO: Should the effective policy message be the same as the policy message? If it's different, should properties of an effective policy reference the concrete policy which caused it?
-->

# Policy API Guidance

> A policy is a statement of intent. When set on a

Reviewer: Intent to...what?

Author: I've rephrased this opening based off a different portion of the wikipedia definition of a policy.

[resource](https://aip.dev/121) and its descendants. Some examples of
controllable behaviors are:  who can access a resource, what configurations are
allowed for a resource, and what billing account to charge for a resource’s
usage.

## Definitions

There are 2 types of policies, _dedicated_ and _shared_.

A _dedicated_ policy shares an identifier with the resource it is bound to. IAM

> policies in GCP are an example of dedicated polices. Users "set" the policy on

Reviewer 2: nit: repeated "on" ("on" directly "on")

Author: whoops. Thanks for catching this.

directly on the resource they intend it to apply to, and all children of the
resource inherit the policy.

A _shared_ policy is a first-class resource (with its own identifier) and can
even have policies applied to it (like an authorization policy). Unlike other
resources, a shared policy can be _bound_ to one or more resources, and applies
to those resources and any descendants. An example of a shared policy is

> billing accounts, which are associated with resources that bill to them.

Reviewer 3: "is a billing account" or "are billing accounts"

Reviewer 4: How about:

"A billing account bound to a number of resources would be a good representation of a shared policy."

## Guidance

### Standard Methods

For most policy types, the policy name **should** be incorporated into the
method name. For example, `GetBillingPolicy` for a Billing policy. The
descriptions below omit the specific policy type for brevity.

> ### Dedicated Policies

Reviewer 4: After seeing the practical implementations of dedicated policies I don't think we should recommend such implementations. There are way too many downsides for this pattern to justify the implementation simplicity.

> #### Dedicated Policies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Dedicated policies
```

> If a resource can only have one of policy type bound to it, and there does not

Reviewer 3: This doesn't read correctly and/or is grammatically incorrect. I would suggest,

"If the policy type can only be bound to one resource type, ..."

> If a resource can only have one of your policy type bound to it, and there does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a resource can only have one policy type bound to it, and there does
```

need to be a separation of authorization privilege between the resource and the
policy, then services **may** use a dedicated policy.

Dedicated polices are the simpler of the two to implement, with a smaller API

> scope. The authorization policy applied to the resource applies to the policy

Reviewer 3: Reversing these phrases would make it easier to read, imo, "With a smaller API scope, dedicated policies are simpler (of the two types of policies) to implement.

as well. This can be problematic if users have permissions to modify
permissions on the resource, yet aren't intended to be able to modify the
policy.

- **SetPolicy** - Sets a dedicated policy for a resource
- **GetPolicy** - Retrieves the dedicated policy for a resource
- **DeletePolicy** - Deletes the dedicated policy for a resource
- **LookupEffectivePolicy** - Retrieves the effective policy for a resource,

>   which is the combination of policies on the resource and any ancestors

Reviewer 3: Link to API documentation on cloud.google.com?

#### Shared Policies

> If you want to bind a single policy to multiple resources, or want to apply a

Reviewer: Nit: We have not used second person much in the past. (It is not _wrong_, so much as just not the writing style of other authors...by which I mostly mean, well, me.) We may need a expanded AIP style guide at some point, because I feel guilty "correcting" this.

I propose "APIs" or "services" as a substitute for "you", purely for consistently. I acknowledge potential value in revisiting this. I am not convinced that either second-person or third-person is better, but I do want them to match.

Author: better?

policy to your policy (eg., an authorization policy), then you **should** use a
shared policy.

- **CreatePolicy** - Creates a shared policy resource
- **GetPolicy** - Retrieves a shared policy resource
- **UpdatePolicy** - Updates a shared policy resource
- **DeletePolicy** - Deletes a shared policy resource
- **ListPolicies** - Lists shared policy resources (typically for a given
  `parent`)
- **LookupEffectivePolicy** - Retrieves the effective policy for a given
  `resource`, which is the combination of the polices bound to the resource and
  any ancestors
- **CreateBinding** - Creates a binding between a shared policy resource and a
  specified resource
- **GetBinding** - Retrieves a binding between a shared policy resource and a
  resource
- **DeleteBinding** - Deletes a binding between a shared policy resource and a
  resource
- **ListBindings** - Lists bindings between shared policy resources and other
  resources. This method **must** accept either a reference to the shared
  policy resource or the target resource (typically via the `filter` field),
  and list all appropriate bindings.

#### Permissions

> Each policy method **should** have a separate permission, per standard

Reviewer: I may have missed the part of this document (or another AIP) that "per standard practice" points back to?

Author: A quick search did not yield a documented standard for this so I have replaced "per standard practice" with an actual reason (allowing the expression of fine-grained authorization policies). My stance on this is based on numerous interactions with the GCP IAM team.

expression of fine-grained authorization policies.

Bindings are a bit special in that they connect two resources. Conceptually,
it's easiest to think of a binding as two half-bindings, one connected to the
policy and one connected to the resource. Each half-binding has its own
permission to create/delete. Therefore, creating a binding between a policy and
a resource requires two permissions; however breaking a binding only requires
permission on either the policy or the resource.

**Note:** No guidance is currently given for re-creating a binding. In theory,
only half of a binding could be deleted, thus requiring only a single
permission to re-establish the missing half of the binding.

> ### Effective Policies

Reviewer 3: Since this was written, didn't we introduce "skip policies". I might be remembering the name improperly, but essentially, they can be inserted in the tree so that effective policies are removed for a role or group below that type of policy. Should we add these to the documentation?

An effective policy is the combination of policies applied to the ancestry of a
resource. For example, determining the effective policy for a VM would require
loading the policies attached to the VM, Project, Folder, and Organization.

> There are multiple combination strategies, and which one chosen depends on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple combination strategies, and which is chosen depends on the
```

policy system. Generally speaking, policies **should** be combined in an

> additive fashion where leaf nodes take precedence for ALLOW semantics, and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
additive fashion where leaf nodes take precedence for `ALLOW` semantics, and the
```

> root nodes taking precedence for DENY semantics. This strategy works well for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
root nodes taking precedence for `DENY` semantics. This strategy works well for
```
